---
layout: post
title: My Zurkhaneh Part Two
---

## Shena
This tool is designed after a sword and is placed on the ground to be used as a pushup platform. Your guess is as good as mine as to what a sword and pushups have to do with each other, and there are a couple explanations banging about on the internet. Without any outstandingly definitive connection that I could find, one thing is clear, this is a good exercise.

Like with the shield presses, this isn't just about pushing. Half of the time, you are in a rather wide split stance, and there is quite a good deal of forward bending; but that is just the standard pushup. While these pushups are done continuously for over ten minutes, there are a lot of little pushing breaks between. In most cases, it's just a pike support (which still isn't really a rest for the arms), but oftentimes, practitioners can jazz things up by pushing off of the board, standing up, and moving about in the split stance to get various stretches.

Before I get into any actual exercises or form, let's talk about the shena board. Some people say it's still used because of tradition, and others talk about it being beneficial to form or people with less flexible wrists. I find that it's greatest strength is that you don't slip on the floor. I'm quite fond of using the least amount of gear so that I'm never without the means to exercise, and I've found that these pushups are just as happy to be performed on the ground as they are on anything else. However, I haven't been able to go 15 or 20 minutes without having to get up and wipe my hands and pick a new bit of floor that isn't soaked in sweat. Typical yoga mats do not contain the solution to this problem, but they are good for spotting where your hands need to be placed upon return to the ground. There are yoga mats that are similar to towels on one side, and I would say that this is as good as you'll get. I only made a shena board for this video, and I lasted a bit longer, but I still ended up slipping around  on the board itself. Maybe I just sweat too much, but I assure you that you'll be dripping before you're done with this section. If you really want a shena board, you can either buy one, or make one with a 2x4 (it won't take more than an hour and it's always fun to build stuff!), or maybe use two bricks, which I have not done yet so don't take my word for it. 
## The Pushup
You start this pushup in a pike position with your feet spread rather wide apart and as you drop your hips, you straighten your back, while keeping your elbows as tucked in as you can, until your chest touches the ground, or board, between your hands. Then, just reverse the motion until you are back in the pike position.  Once you get to the top, that's when the fun starts. Typically, you deepen the bend at the waist and stretch out your upper back as a dynamic stretch three times before doing another pushup, but you can also lean your hips a bit back, and push off the board to stand up. While standing, you can do a number of dynamic stretches such as lunges, side bends, chest opening stretches, and toe touches. Since this is normally practiced with a drum beat, there is a tempo to all the movements, and the whole pushup takes 4 beats to perform, so when standing up, which takes one beat, you have two beats to perform your stretches before returning to the pushup. You don't need to have any certain pace, but it does help to keep a little beat going in your head. You can also just do the pushup continuously as one count down and one count back.

The other pushup form is similar to a hindu pushup. In the pike position, practitioners hold themselves up while a short verse is recited, so I like to hold it for 4 seconds. Then you perform a pushup in the same manner as the previous form, but you extend into a cobra stretch from the ground and similarly hold that position for a few counts. Some form of this exercise seems pretty common these days, although I had never seen any sort of squat being done in this position.

[Here are some pushups I like to do.](https://youtu.be/z5TNz3PNjeQ) I've found I like the feeling of doing these pushups a lot more than that of standard pushups, so give it a try; see if you can do 15 minutes without stopping.
